---
title: 'ChatGPT or, writing a scientific method like a used car salesman'
date: 2023-08-16
tags:
  - Pandoc
  - ChatGPT
  - Writing
---

We're very much in a post-GPT world after the summer of excitement following the release of [OpenAI](https://openai.com/) ChatGPT, which rapidly became the [fastest growing internet application of all time](https://time.com/6253615/chatgpt-fastest-growing/).
Since then, a lot of the hype has settled (no, ChatGPT can't just be plugged into \<insert problem here\> to provide an instant benefit to humanity) and a lot of us have likely become familiar with the apologetic yet slightly egotistical tone of ChatGPT.

A lot of us have also likely been on the receiving end of rules and regulations regarding the use of large language models - I myself recently had the University of St Andrews rulebook dropped into my inbox, with all the do's and don'ts of applying ChatGPT to coursework completion, coursework development, coursework marking, coursework complaining, etc.
Surprisingly, it was actually fairly generous and in my opinion well thought out.

Sure, if you submit one of those classic ChatGPT styled essays as coursework, you'll be on the receiving end of some poor feedback, but there is plenty of breathing room for including language models within reason.
And there are real strengths to this - if English isn't your first language for example, then having a language model tidy things up a bit is likely going to be a great leveller for you.
If you're an overworked teaching assistant, you can use a language model to generate tailored and more readable feedback to each student.
Gone are the days of the single "good." comments spattered across a multi-page essay 😭.

This led me to try and see where a language model could find it's place in writing a PhD thesis.
Straightaway they're pretty bad for just "writing a thesis" as you'll probably get at most a really broad and shallow introduction section completed, and good luck synthesising a results or discussion section.
Instead, I figured a good place to get was started was the methods section.
A lot of a methods section will be pretty boilerplate and should be a good candidate for feeding a language model say, a bullet pointed list, and converting it into legible and concise methods.

Turns out, eh, not so much.

## The prompt

To test this out, I tried to get a method going for a standard [Oxford Nanopore](https://nanoporetech.com/) `SQK-LSK114` library preparation.
Realistically I'd like this to work by just giving ChatGPT a scrappy note of what was done and let it handle all the formatting etc.
So I started with:

>Write a PhD thesis level methods section paragraph for the following protocol:
>
>DNA 48µl, NEBNext FFPE DNA Repair Buffer 3.5µl, NEBNext FFPE DNA Repair Mix 2µl, Ultra II End-prep Reaction Buffer 3.5µl, Ultra II End-prep Enzyme 3µl mixed.
>
>incubate at 20°C for 5 minutes and 65°C for 5 minutes.
>
>ampure cleanup 1.8x
>
>10 minute elution in 61µl water.
>
>qubit quantified

Not too hard right?
Probably plenty of data on bead cleanups and Qubit assays in it's training data - what could go wrong?
Well:

>In order to construct high-quality DNA libraries for subsequent sequencing analysis, a meticulously optimized protocol was employed, encompassing several critical steps.
>Initially, a total of 48µl of DNA sample was combined with 3.5µl of NEBNext FFPE DNA Repair Buffer and 2µl of NEBNext FFPE DNA Repair Mix.
>To facilitate repair processes, an additional mixture was created by combining 3.5µl of Ultra II End-prep Reaction Buffer and 3µl of Ultra II End-prep Enzyme.
>These mixtures were thoroughly amalgamated to ensure uniform distribution of reagents.
>
>Subsequently, the mixed solution was subjected to a temperature-dependent incubation regimen.
>The reaction commenced with an incubation step at 20°C for a duration of 5 minutes, facilitating preliminary repair reactions.
>This was sequentially followed by an incubation at 65°C for an equivalent duration of 5 minutes, aimed at promoting more robust repair processes.
>
>To mitigate any potential contaminants and unincorporated reagents, the ensuing DNA mixture was subjected to Ampure XP bead-based purification, utilizing a bead-to-sample ratio of 1.8x.
>This purification step was integral in achieving high-purity DNA libraries by effectively removing unwanted byproducts.
>
>Following purification, elution was conducted to recover the DNA libraries.
>A 10-minute elution process was conducted with 61µl of nuclease-free water, meticulously chosen to optimize DNA recovery efficiency while minimizing dilution effects.
>
>Quantification of the constructed DNA libraries was executed using the Qubit fluorometric quantification system, a gold-standard technique offering high sensitivity and precision in quantifying nucleic acid concentrations.
>This quantification step ensured accurate determination of DNA library concentrations, thereby facilitating subsequent pooling and normalization steps in the sequencing workflow.
>
>In sum, the aforementioned multi-step protocol employed a judicious combination of reagents and optimized incubation conditions to prepare high-quality DNA libraries.
>The systematic integration of repair, purification, elution, and quantification steps collectively ensured the generation of DNA libraries primed for downstream sequencing applications with minimal bias and high fidelity.

## An improvement?

"a meticulously optimized protocol" ?!??!

"a judicious combination of reagents" ?!??!

I'm pretty surprised by this as I can't think of any situation in which that would be "PhD thesis level".
Unless ChatGPT is getting caught in that arms race of positive adjectives in prompts - whereby "PhD level" is translated to "make it sound like it was written by an absolute weapon".
Similar to how people append strings of "beautiful breathtaking extremely detailed talented exquisite" to their [Midjourney](https://www.midjourney.com/) prompts to get a better result. 

Let's disarm this a bit:

> No.
> Be extremely concise without buzzwords

And response:

>DNA samples (48µl) were repaired using NEBNext FFPE DNA Repair Buffer (3.5µl) and NEBNext FFPE DNA Repair Mix (2µl).
>This mixture was combined with Ultra II End-prep Reaction Buffer (3.5µl) and Ultra II End-prep Enzyme (3µl) and incubated at 20°C for 5 minutes, followed by 65°C for 5 minutes.
>Purification was performed using Ampure beads (1.8x), and DNA libraries were eluted in 61µl water for 10 minutes.
>Quantification was done using the Qubit system.

## An unimprovement

That's more like it!
Surely now that it has an idea of what I want, I can feed it some more and get more of the same!
This time, I copy and pasted the rest of the protocol across, formatting mistakes and all.

>With that style, continue with this:
>\<pasted a bunch of stuff here\>

Response:

>The ligation and purification of library adapters were executed with meticulous attention to specific steps. It was recognized that the utilization of the Ligation Buffer (LNB) from the provided Ligation Sequencing Kit enhanced the ligation efficiency of the Ligation Adapter (LA), notwithstanding the availability of a third-party ligase with its own buffer.
>
>Furthermore, the efficiency of the clean-up step post-adapter ligation was contingent upon the wash buffer selection. Long Fragment Buffer (LFB) enriched DNA fragments above 3 kb, while Short Fragment Buffer (SFB) uniformly purified fragments of all sizes.
>
>The ligation reaction was initiated by combining the DNA sample from the preceding step (60 μl), Ligation Buffer (LNB) (25 μl), NEBNext Quick T4 DNA Ligase (10 μl), and Ligation Adapter (LA) (5 μl) within a 1.5 ml Eppendorf DNA LoBind tube. Gently mixing and brief centrifugation ensured homogeneity.
>
>After incubating the reaction for 10 minutes at room temperature, resuspended AMPure XP Beads (AXP) (40 μl) were added to the reaction, mixed by tube flicking, and incubated on a rotator mixer for 5 minutes at room temperature. Subsequent to magnet-based separation and supernatant removal, bead washing was performed using either Long Fragment Buffer (LFB) or Short Fragment Buffer (SFB) through successive resuspension and pellet-based separation steps.
>
>Following careful bead drying and resuspension in Elution Buffer (EB) (15 μl), the sample was incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature, with a higher incubation temperature of 37°C suggested for maximizing recovery of long fragments.
>
>Quantification was carried out using a Qubit fluorometer. For further loading onto the flow cell, it was advised to load 10-20 fmol of the final prepared library onto the flow cell, while excess DNA above 20 fmol was cautioned to potentially reduce duplex read capture efficiency.
>
>In preparation for sequencing, storage recommendations for the library were provided, advocating either short-term storage at 4°C or long-term storage at -80°C, within Eppendorf DNA LoBind tubes. Dilution of the library in Elution Buffer (EB) was proposed if the library was to be distributed across multiple flow cells, with additional buffer quantities required beyond kit supply.
>
>In conclusion, this ligation and purification protocol outlined precise steps for the preparation of DNA libraries, fostering optimal ligation efficiency and purification selectivity, ultimately paving the way for successful library sequencing and analysis.

## Outlook

I'm sure that with more tweaking I could get it to reliable spit out useful methods, but at that point I might as well just write the methods myself.
The aim with this was more to get ChatGPT to homogenise any method into a standard style, but it seemed to really want to show off all the fancy words it knows instead.
I later tried giving it a prewritten methods section to try and get it to gently edit that instead, but again it seemed more keen to wax poetic about "deft pipetting" and "incorrigible PCR machining".

This will probably all be out of date within the next year once language models become embedded in microsoft word, although probably not my [stupid thesis pipeline]({{< ref "/posts/2022-12-09-pandoc" >}}).
However, I do think this is one of the current odd limitations of language models, in particular OpenAIs highly language-policed ChatGPT.
Without considerable adaptations and adjustments to prompting (which kind of removes the ease of use which attracted you in the first place) it always ends up returning to this bizarre used-car salesman language.
I saw it creeping into coursework last year, and I'm certain I'm going to see a lot of it more this year.

On the other hand, perhaps we should just embrace this new-speak and give ourselves a pat on the back for producing such meticulously optimized protocol. Or in ChatGPTs words:

>Wholeheartedly embracing ChatGPT's lexicon replete with buzzwords and superlatives could veritably engender an atmosphere of unabating exhilaration and unquestionable dynamism within diverse communication paradigms. This paradigm, festooned with resplendent verbiage and resonant hyperbole, has the ostensible potential to captivate the intellectual faculties and catalyze cognitive engagement across multifarious stakeholders. By orchestrating this symphony of grandiloquence and magniloquence, one may envisage a synergy between linguistic extravagance and cognitive resonance, thereby precipitating an indelible confluence of perception and impression that could be nothing short of transcendent.